Share Market India

There are no in-betweens when it comes to the share market in India. You either know all about it or you don’t. If you are one of the latter, welcome to the jungle. You are about to embark on a journey that will not just introduce you to a plethora of opportunities but a lifetime worth of learning too.  But first, let’s begin with the basics.

What is a share market?

Share market is a place that allows you to trade and invest in shares/stocks of various publicly-held companies. This is facilitated by institutionalized exchanges that follow a defined set of regulations.

Stock Exchanges of India

The share market in India operates through two stock exchanges – Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE) and National Stock Exchange (NSE).  Both the exchanges follow the regulations laid down by Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI).BSE is Asia’s first stock exchange. It was established in 1875 compared to NSE, which was founded in 1992. BSE has approximately 5000 companies listed on it and NSE around 1500. Both the exchanges are based in Mumbai, India and follow the same trading hours, trading and settlement process.

Offerings of Share Market in India

Indian share markets offer two prominent segments for trading – Equities and Derivatives. You can trade in direct equities, that is buy and sell shares of listed companies, or invest through mutual funds. Under derivatives, you can trade in futures and options, which are available in equities, commodities and currencies.

Trading in Share Market

Trading in share markets of India is completely digital. It’s driven by order placements through brokers like Sharekhan who facilitate delivery of shares. The entire process is automated through online trading facility provided by the broker. Institutional investors have the option of placing orders via trading terminals i.e. directly into the stock market trading terminal provided by the brokers. Since the entire process is online and on real-time basis, you can trade in the share market LIVE.

Apart from facilitating order placements, some full service brokers offer a range of products and services. Sharekhan provides research, a dedicated relationship manager, on ground query resolutions through its branches and reliable trading platforms like the website, TradeTiger – the desktop trading terminal, Sharekhan App and Sharekhan Mini for seamless trading.

Settlement of Shares

Once you place an order to buy or sell a share in the equity markets, it gets settled on a T+2 basis, where T stands for the trading day and +2 being two days after the trading day. This means if you place your trade on a Friday, your order will get settled by Tuesday since the stock market remains closed on Saturday and Sunday. Trading in share markets of India takes place between 9.15 am to 3.30 pm IST, from Monday to Friday. Once your order is executed, the delivery of the shares happens in dematerialized form only.

How can you participate?

Since you can place orders only through an authorized broker, the first step would be to open a trading +demat account with a leading, full-service broker like Sharekhan. Once your account is open, let your relationship manager guide you through your trading and investment journey.
How to invest in the share market?

The world of stock market is a fascinating one. You can enter it for different reasons –making a career out of it, generating passive income or simply earning money. No matter what your motivation, it’s always good to know how to invest money in share market before actually entering it.

Here’s your starter kit on how to invest in the share market for beginners

We bring you four basic and essential steps on how to invest in the share market.

1) Open a demat and trading account with a broker

There are many brokers in India who facilitate the process of investing and trading on your behalf. Sharekhan is one of the most widely-known brokers of India. Opening a demat and a trading account is mandatory as you’re not allowed to directly invest in share market in India, according to the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)

To open an account, you will your PAN card, Aadhaar card, a copy of six-month bank statement and a cancelled cheque. To open your Sharekhan account, click here

2) Evaluate your risk profile

Once your demat and trading account is open, you are practically ready to invest in share market. But before you actually push in the money, chalk out your investment goals and identify your risk appetite. Your investment goals could be funding your child’s education or marriage, saving for an international holiday, retirement planning, etc. Your risk appetite will vary between low, medium and high risk taker. Once you know your goals and risk appetite, you move on to choosing the stock market segment you want to trade or invest in.

3) Pick a market segment

Stock markets offer 4 broad segments to invest and trade in viz. Mutual Funds, Equity, Derivatives and Commodities. Depending on your risk appetite, knowledge about these segments and prior experience in trading, you can pick the segment to begin. Although, if you’re a beginner, we highly recommend you start with mutual funds or investing in must-have stocks. If you’re curious to know about the other segments, we recommend you register for sessions on Sharekhan Classroom.

4) Start trading and investing

If you have followed the above three steps of how to invest in the share market, all you need to do is transfer margin amount into your demat and trading account and place an order.

Best shares to buy

Investing in share market

The first step to start investing in direct equities is selecting the right stocks. If you’re a beginner, the process can be a little daunting as you have to choose from 5000 stocks listed in BSE or around 1,600 listed in NSE. But since you’re a beginner, it is also easier in more ways than one. We bring you five ways if you’re looking for best shares to buy today.

1) Ask questions

Never invest blindly in stock markets. No matter how good the advice for ‘best shares to buy’ seems, always seek to understand why you were recommended those stocks. The ‘why’ and ‘how’ of a call often helps you in taking smart investment decisions that have the potential of bearing fruits in the long run. You can also participate in various trade and investment specific forums and connect with trade experts to get a topical perspective on a stock. 

2) Educate yourself

There is no substitute to sound knowledge when it comes to investing in stock markets followed by real experience. Get access to free online resources that unravel the basics of trading and investing. Aim to understand these six factors about a stock that will help you identify the best shares to buy – earnings growth, presence in its sector, stability, debt equity ratio, price earnings ratio, vision of the company’s management and scope for dividends. 

3) Invest in your favourite brands

Think numbers are way too daunting? Here’s a way that’s completely experiential.  Visit the stores of your favourite brands and talk to the store manager about how the brand is doing and how does it intend to grow. Or even why you should buy from that particular brand. If you find the answers inspiring, do a little research on how the parent company of the brand is doing. If you feel that they are consistently well and show growth potential, invest in it. Do remember, it is always good to consult an expert before you add a brand/company under best shares to buy bucket. 

4) Ask your RM

Once you open a demat account with Sharekhan, you will be assigned a dedicated relationship manager (RM) to help you navigate the different segments of stock markets. He/she is qualified to recommend the best shares to buy for beginners in India based on Sharekhan Research. 

5) Subscribe to Market Research

Sharekhan Research is carried out by highly experienced research analysts to bring you the latest stock recommendations that help you take sound investment decisions.  You can always start investing in Sharekhan Must Have stocks that are curated exclusively for newbies like you
how to analyse stock market trends

Try to catch fish while standing in the waters and you will find it relatively harder. You can lose your balance or get dragged by a current. Trade in the live share market is no different. If you are not familiar with stock market trends or poring over company financials, don’t jump straight in. Take a pause, as Sharekhan tells you how to go about it.

What is a trend?

A trend is the direction in which the stock you are tracking is moving. It can either move up or down depending on whether the markets are rallying or falling. The longer it moves in one direction, the more significant the trend is said to be. If the trend is positive, you can ride it, make profits as long as you move along with it, until the trend reverses.

What is trend analysis?

Another name for this is technical analysis. Technical analysis tries to predict the future movement in a stock based on past data, chart patterns, etc. Share market trends can be of various types:

Primary- Lasts for 1-3 years, where peaks are constantly higher than the previous one.

Secondary- Lasts for three weeks to three months. This trend is a weaker phase within a primary trend. For instance, if a primary trend lasts for 2 years, there may be a phase when prices decline constantly for a month or two before resuming pace again. This weak phase is called a secondary trend.

Minor- Typically lasts for a few days to a few weeks and is a short-term movement contrary to the secondary trend. For instance, if a stock keeps falling for two consecutive months, there may be a week in between where the prices tend to move up. This is however very short-lived in nature.

These trends are analysed based on the data available on a particular sector or the index as a whole.

There are other factors that can impact a share market live trend. For instance there may be a new regulation or a policy change that impacts the whole industry or macroeconomic factors such as interest rates, a rise or fall in tax rates and the likes that may influence a stock market trend.

Parameters to study a trend

Trends form in the market continuously. However, you need to understand some parameters to know if the data you study validates that trend. Here are some parameters:

Relative Strength Index (RSI)- On a scale of 1-100, the RSI tells you whether a stock is overbought or oversold. A reading above 70 means that you can sell the stock, whereas a reading below 30 means that a stock is ripe for the picking.

Support and Resistance – The support level for a stock or an index indicates the level to which it can fall. It usually matches the daily low. Similarly, resistance is marked by the high that a stock achieves in a day.

Moving Averages – These averages are calculated for any time period. There are different types of moving averages – simple moving average, exponential moving average and weighted moving average.

Moving average convergence divergence (MACD) – This indicator is made up of two lines – the fast and the slow. If the fast line moves ahead of the slow line, it means you can buy a stock and vice versa.
Ten habits for efficient trading

If you are a budding cook following recipes online, with every dish you make,  you make notes about what goes wrong and try different permutations and combinations. Only after a few attempts you get it just right and over time. Strange as it may sound, trading in the stock markets is quite similar. You may read up all the matter there is about trading on the internet and even do an online course, but unless you do your own research you can. If you are an aspiring trader, Sharekhan tells you about are ten habits you can inculcate for efficient trading.

The learning never stops

To be an efficient trader, you need to keep yourself relevant by constantly learning about new rules, trading techniques and regulations and keeping abreast with new technologies. To be an efficient trader you need to be a perpetual student.

Be flexible

When you are operating a trading account you need to have a flexible attitude towards markets. Markets are erratic and can take any turn at any moment. As a trader, train yourself to be flexible, so that you are never taken aback by sudden jolts. Being adaptable to any situation is a ground rule for any efficient trader.

Be realistic

Trading is profitable if you do it right over time, but do not set out with expectations of enormous profits instantly. Learn the tricks of the trade and take one step at a time. The key is to have realistic expectations that will give you a sense of achievement when successful.

Self-control holds the key

Being overambitious or too conservative to trade can work against you. Keep a calm head over your shoulders and respond to every market situation with an apt strategy.

Daily analysis

This is the most important thing that every efficient day trader does. After each trading day, keep a daily log of your trade. Over time you will see a pattern developing on what works for you to help you strategise accordingly. 
Strive for flawless execution

The best of the trading minds across the world, do not try anything new every day. Instead they focus on a few tried and tested strategies and strive for flawless execution of the same. They judge themselves on how well the strategies were executed rather than measuring success on the basis of random trades that may be winners or losers.

Make risk management a priority

As a new trader you may be too focussed on profits or losses. But you know that you have made a transition from an amateur to a pro, the day your focus has changed from mere profit and loss to protecting what you have or risk management at the core of your strategy.

 

Enjoy the learning process

Like every other profession, trading too has a learning curve. Learn from your mistakes and be patient and tolerant. Over time you will have mastered the art of trading. Enjoy the learning process instead of being too focussed on the outcome.

Passion, determination and persistence

Let’s face it, only people with a true passion for trading, can ultimately make it as a trader. It is the kind of thing that excites you about getting out of bed each morning and spending time on your trading terminal. The other pre-requisite to become an efficient trader is determination. While you need to take failures in your stride, never start out with the intention to fail. But at the end of the day, do not take every failure to heart. Learn from your mistakes and move on. Persistence is key to make the cut as an efficient trader. 

Lead a balanced life

For traders who have finally found their calling, trading can be an all-consuming activity, when you feel that there is nothing more important in the world than carrying out your trades. Although focus is important in trading, don’t lose perspective of the other important things in life. Maintain a healthy and balanced lifestyle, where you find time for family and friends and carry out your trading activities on the other. Do not let it take control of you.